Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to download this practice lab
from the link in the description and try it
out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, you can use it up
to CCNP level even, whereas Packet Tracer
is too limited to do much beyond CCNA-level.
Here, you can see all of the labs available
in NetSim for CCNA.
These are all detailed, guided labs that not
only help you practice what you’ve learned,
but really test your understanding, so I think
NetSim is a fantastic study tool for the CCNA.
If you want more practice relevant to what
we’re covering now at this point in the
course, look here in the ‘network access’
section.
These labs about VLANs and trunking feature
both DTP and VTP.
Make sure to stick around to the end of this
video for a preview of one of these labs.
If you want to grab a copy of NetSim for CCNA,
follow the link in the video description,
I highly recommend it.
Let’s get started with today’s lab.
Basically, we’ll go through some of the
DTP and VTP configurations we covered in the
lecture video.
There are 4 VLANs in the lab, VLAN10, 20,
30, and 40.
We’ll use VTP to share the VLAN configurations
between these switches.
So, step 1 says to configure the switchports
connecting switches as trunks and disable
DTP on them, so G0/1 on SW1, G0/1 and G0/2
on SW2, and G0/1 on SW3.
Let’s go on SW1.  First, enter privileged exec
mode with ENABLE, then global config mode
with CONF T. The configure G0/1, INTERFACE
G0/1.
Actually, before configuring it let’s check
the current administrative and operational
modes with this command: DO SHOW INTERFACE
G0/1 SWITCHPORT.
Okay, as I mentioned in the lecture the administrative
mode is dynamic auto by default, same as SW2’s
G0/1 interface, so the operational mode is
static access.
Notice that negotiation of trunking is on,
so DTP frames are indeed being sent out of
this interface.
Actually, let’s go into Packet Tracer's simulation mode
to see them being sent.
I will click through here, and you should
see lots of STP frames being sent, some CDP
frames, as well as some DTP frames.
STP and CDP are other protocols that I will
talk about later in the course, actually I
think STP will be the topic of day 20’s
lecture video.
So, the point is you can see DTP negotiation
frames are indeed being sent out of the switchports.
However, because all are in dynamic auto mode,
no trunks are formed.
Now let’s go back to realtime mode and return
to the CLI.
I’ll configure a trunk now.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
Now let’s do the show command again.
DO SHOW INTERFACE G0/1 SWITCHPORT.
Okay, now both the administrative and operational
modes are trunk, however negotiation of trunking,
DTP, is still on.
Let’s disable it.
SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE.
Okay, let’s check once more.
DO SHOW INTERFACE G0/1 SWITCHPORT.
Great, now negotiation of trunking is disabled.
Next up is SW2.  Enter privileged exec mode
with ENABLE, then global config mode CONF
T. Configurations on G0/1 and G0/2 will be
the same, so I will configure both at the
same time.
INTERFACE RANGE G0/1 to 2.
Now let’s configure them as trunks and disable DTP.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE.
And let’s check.
DO SHOW INTERFACE G0/1 SWITCHPORT.
Okay, both modes are trunk, and negotiation is off.
Looks good, next G0/2.
DO SHOW INTERFACE G0/2 SWITCHPORT.
Same, looks good.
Finally let’s configure SW3.  Again, enter privileged
exec mode with ENABLE, then global config
mode, CONF T. Configure the interface, INTERFACE
G0/1.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE.
And let’s check.
DO SHOW INTERFACE G0/1 SWITCHPORT.
Okay, looks good.
So, step 1 is complete.
Now we’ll configure VTP, I’ll return to
SW1.  Let’s exit of out interface config
mode, EXIT.
And check the current VTP situation.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
The output looks a little different than in
the IOS version I used in the lecture, but
the same fields are here.
Different switches or different IOS versions
might have slightly different behavior and
show slightly different output, so just be
aware of that and adapt.
VTP version displays as 2, however down here
VTP V2 mode is disabled, so really version
1 is operating.
The domain name is blank too, as expected.
So let’s configure it now.
First, the domain name.
VTP DOMAIN CCNA.
And let’s create the VLANs.
VLAN 10.
VLAN 20.
VLAN 30.
exit.
Let’s check again.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
So, the domain name is CCNA, the number of
VLANs is now 8, and the configuration revision
number is 3, because it increased by 1 for
each VLAN we created.
Now, we haven’t done any VTP configurations
on SW2 and SW3, do you think they will have
added VLANs 10, 20 and 30?
According to what I said in the lecture, they
should.
When they receive VTP advertisements from
SW1, they should join SW1’s VTP domain and
sync their VLAN databases.
Let’ check on SW2.  First get out of
interface config mode.
EXIT.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
Indeed, it has joined the VTP domain and the
revision number is 3.
Let’s check the VLANs.
DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF.
There they are, VLAN10, 20, and 30.
Let’s check SW3 also.  EXIT.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
Looks like SW3 has synced as well.
Let’s check the VLANs.
DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF.
So, SW3 has also added VLANs 10, 20 and 30,
without any configuration.
Next, for step 3, let’s configure SW2 in
VTP transparent mode and add VLAN40.  So,
set the VTP mode with this command: VTP MODE
TRANSPARENT.
Now let’s add VLAN40.
VLAN 40.
EXIT.
And let’s check VTP.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
So, the revision number is now 0 because it's in transparent mode.
The number of VLANs is now 9.
It kept the VLANs it synced from SW1 before,
but now it has added VLAN40.
Do you think SW1 and SW3 have added VLAN40 now?
They shouldn’t, since SW2 is in transparent
mode.
Let’s check on SW1.  Okay, let’s check the
VLANs.
DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF.
As expected, no VLAN40.
Let’s go on SW3 now.  DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF.  Again, no VLAN40.
That’s because switches in VTP transparent
mode don’t send VTP advertisements, although
SW2 will forward VTP advertisements between
SW1 and SW3.
Let’s go to step 4, configure SW3 in client
mode.
We’re on SW3 now, so let’s do it.
VTP MODE CLIENT.
Now, let’s try to add another VLAN, VLAN50,
here on SW3.
VLAN 50.
As you can see, we are not allowed to configure
new VLANs on SW3 now that it is in VTP client
mode.
So, if we want to add new VLANs on SW3, we
have to configure them on SW1, which will
advertise the changes to SW3, which will then
sync its VLAN database.
Finally let’s do step 5, configure the switchports
connected to end hosts in the correct VLANs,
configure them as access ports, and check
if DTP is still enabled on them.
Starting here on SW3, F0/1 in VLAN 10, 2 and
3 are in VLAN30, and F0/4 is in VLAN20.
INTERFACE F0/1.
Before I configure it, let me check if DTP
is enabled, it should be.
DO SHOW INTERFACE F0/1 SWITCHPORT.
As you can see, negotiation of trunking is
on, so SW3 will continue sending DTP frames
to PC5, even though it will never form a trunk
here.
Now let’s configure it.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN10.
And let’s see if that disabled DTP.
DO SHOW INTERFACE F0/1 SWITCHPORT.
So, as you can see, manually configuring an
access port with the command SWITCHPORT MODE
ACCESS does indeed disable DTP, negotiation
of trunking is now off.
Now that we’ve confirmed that, I’ll just
quickly run through the rest of the configurations.
INTERFACE RANGE F0/2 to 3.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 30.
INTERFACE F0/4.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 20.
Okay, next up, SW2.  INTERFACE RANGE F0/1 to 2.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 40.
Okay, and finally, SW1.  INTERFACE RANGE F0/1 to 2.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN10.
INTERFACE F0/3.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 20.
Okay, so in this lab we took a look at DTP
and VTP configurations.
That’s all for this lab, let’s move on
to take a look at Boson NetSim for CCNA.
Okay, for today's Boson NetSim lab preview
I've chosen a fairly simple lab.
Configuring VTP Client Mode on Switches.
As you can see here, there are quite a few
of these Boson NetSim guided labs provided
for you, and some of them are quite complex,
quite difficult.
But some of them are more simple.
So, just to show you that, I have chosen one of
the more simple labs today, Configuring VTP
Client Mode on Switches.
I've already loaded it.
So I'll just go on 'lab instructions' here.
The objective: configure VLAN trunking protocol
(VTP) on a switch.
Test VLAN updates from one switch configured
as a VTP server.
Prevent a second switch from creating VLANs.
And here is the topology.
Two switches connected with two interfaces,
FastEthernet0/11 and FastEthernet0/12.
Here are the commands you need to know to
complete the lab.
And a summary of the IP addresses.
So, there are nine steps to this lab.
Let's do the first, 6 I think, until configuring
a VTP client.
So, step 1.
Configure Switch1 with the appropriate host
name.
Configure FastEtherne0/11 and 0/12 to always
be trunks.
Okay, so I am already in the CLI of Switch1.
So let's do ENABLE, CONF T. And set the host
name.
HOST Switch1.
Okay, and then FastEthernet0/11 and 0/12 to
always be trunks.
INTERFACE RANGE F0/11 to 12.
First let's check the operational mode.
DO SHOW INTERFACE F0/11 SWITCHPORT.
Okay, so it is already in dynamic desirable
mode and operating as a trunk.
But we want to configure it to always be a
trunk, so we will manually configure it as
a trunk.
I assume FastEthernet0/12 is also the same.
Yes it is.
Okay, so let's configure them to always be
a trunk.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
And let's check, FastEthernet0/11.
Administrative mode trunk, operational mode
trunk.
And FastEthernet0/12 is the same.
Okay, next step 2 is do the same thing on Switch2.
So, here under 'devices', click on Switch2,
and click on console to access the CLI.
ENABLE.
CONF T. Host name of Switch2.
INTERFACE RANGE F0/11 to 12.
SWITCH MODE TRUNK.
And I'll check.
SHOW INTERFACE F0/11 SWITCHPORT.
Ah, so I forgot the 'DO' at the front of the
command.
So, if you're in this situation and you want
to return to the beginning of a command to
type 'DO', or type 'NO' to cancel it, just
hit Ctrl-A on your keyboard.
Then type DO space enter.
Okay, administrative and operational mode
trunk.
So this interface will always be a trunk.
And FastEthernet0/12, same.
Okay, on Switch1 and Switch2 configure the
VTP domain name to be cisco.
So let's do that.
I'll exit out of interface configuration mode.
Let's check the current VTP configuration.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
Okay, so it already has a VTP domain name
pre-configured, 'bigdomain'.
If this was 'null', actually let's check on
Switch2 also.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
Same, okay, so it was also pre-configured
in 'bigdomain'.
If both of them didn't have a domain yet,
if you configured the VTP domain on one of
them, the other would then sync to that and
change its domain name to that name.
But because they are already pre-configured,
we have to configure the domain name on both.
So, VTP DOMAIN cisco.
Okay, and Switch2 also.
VTP DOMAIN cisco.
There we go.
Okay, on Switch1 verify that the switch is
configured as a VTP server.
So, do that same show command.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
Yes it is, it is in the default operating
mode of 'VTP server'.
Configure Switch2 as a VTP client.
Okay, it also is a server, so VTP MODE CLIENT.
And let's verify.
With, again with DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
Okay, so it has changed to operating mode
of 'client'.
Okay, so there are a few more steps in this
lab but I will leave it here for today.
If you want to get a copy of NetSim, please
follow the link in the description.
Again, if you can I highly recommend you do,
these are fantastic guided labs and plenty
of practice to help you get ready for your
CCNA.
Okay, so follow that link in the description.
Back to our packet tracer lab for a second,
I want to show you one more feature of VTP
that I didn’t mention in the lecture video,
it’s the VTP password.
A switch will reject any VTP advertisement
if the password doesn’t match.
So, let’s go back on SW1.
I’ll set the password with this command:
VTP PASSWORD, and I’ll make it cisco.
Now let’s make another VLAN.
VLAN 50.
exit.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
So, the revision number is now 4, and the
number of VLANs is 9.
Let’s go see if SW3 accepts this advertisement.  DO
SHOW VTP STATUS.
So, SW3 has a revision number of 3 and 8 VLANs,
it has not accepted the advertisement.
What if I set an incorrect password?
VTP PASSWORD CCNA.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
It still doesn’t accept the advertisement.
Now let’s set the correct password.
VTP PASSWORD cisco.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
Okay, you can see SW3 has now accepted the
advertisement and synced with SW1.
Just wanted to show you that extra feature
of VTP.
That’s all for this lab.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.